FREQUENTLY ASKED BLOOD DONATION QUESTIONS.
1. Why should I donate blood?
The need for blood affects us all. Eight out of ten people need blood or blood products at some time in our lives. One out of every ten patients in hospital requires blood transfusion. 
Blood is in constant demand for the treatment of patients involved in accidents, patients with anaemia, malaria, cancer or a bleeding disorder such as haemophilia. Many surgical operations would not be possible without the availability of blood. Blood may be needed during or following childbirth or for an exchange transfusion in newborn babies.
The need for blood never stops. Blood donors save lives. Every blood donation gives the person who receives it a new chance at life.

2. Who may donate blood?
Donors should be between the ages of 18 and 65, weigh at least 50 kg and not have donated blood within the previous 12 weeks (for males). The criteria, which are applied before a person can be accepted as a blood donor, are very strict. Not everyone can be a blood donor. This is designed to protect the health of the donor as well as the health of the patient who receives the blood.
What do I get in return for my blood donation?
Blood is donated voluntarily, freely and without payment or reward of any kind. Blood must only be donated in the spirit of altruism for patients who need blood or blood products as part of their medical treatment. Blood is donated as an act of goodwill towards a fellow human being and nothing should be expected in return for giving this gift of life.
What you do get in return is a physical and emotional sense of well-being and the knowledge that you have helped to save someone's life. We all hope that someone will do the same for us when we need a blood transfusion.

3. Is there a substitute for blood?
There is no substitute for blood. When the patient's haemoglobin level, platelet level or coagulation factor level falls below a critical point, blood transfusion is the only option. Patients rely on voluntary blood donors to provide red blood cells, platelets and coagulation factors, to meet their medical needs.
How does the BTS meet the need for rare blood types?
If a patient who needs a blood transfusion is identified by the BTS as having an unusual blood type, blood that is compatible with that of the patient will be identified from the panel of regular blood donors.
A panel of blood donors who have rare blood types has been compiled. This is the so-called “rare blood donor file”. Blood from donors on this panel can be obtained whenever needed.
In exceptional cases, where compatible blood cannot be obtained in this country, blood is obtained from another country through the international rare blood donor file. Similarly, on rare occasions, blood from a donor with a rare blood group from one country may be sent to another country to be transfused to a specific patient.

4. Is there anything special I need to do before donating?
Eat at your regular mealtimes and drink plenty of fluid before you donate blood. Have a snack at least four hours before you donate, but do not eat too much right before the donation.
Before you leave the blood donor clinic after your blood donation, have some tea, coffee or a soft drink to help replace the blood volume (approximately 450 ml) which has been reduced as a result of your donation.
Avoid taking aspirin or aspirin-like anti-inflammatory medication in the 72 hours prior to your donation, because aspirin inhibits the function of blood platelets. If you have taken aspirin within this period, your blood platelet component cannot be transfused to a patient.

5. What is the procedure when I donate blood?
Firstly, you will be asked to provide personal details such as your name, address, age, weight, ID number and/or date of birth. A medical history is taken by means of a written questionnaire.
These questions are designed to ascertain that it is medically safe for you to donate blood and that the recipient of your blood will not be harmed in any way. In addition, very personal questions relating to your mode of life and sexual behaviour are asked to ascertain that you are not at increased risk of potentially transmitting infection through transfusion. People are asked to exclude themselves from blood donation if any of the deferral criteria apply to them.
A finger prick test is performed in order to ascertain if your haemoglobin level is within a safe range for donation purposes. Potential donors will be permitted to donate only if this measurement is within the defined, acceptable range. If everything is in order you will proceed to donate your blood.
How long does the donation take?
The procedure, which is performed by a trained, skilled health-care professional, takes approximately 30 minutes. You will give about 450 ml of blood, after which you will be advised to remain on the donor bed for a few minutes longer and then to take some refreshments. Plan to spend about half an hour to an hour at the blood donor centre for the entire process, depending on the size of the centre and the number of donors.

6. Does the needle hurt the entire time?
No. There may be a little sting when the needle is inserted, but there should be no pain whatsoever during the rest of the donation.
How long will it take my body to replenish the donated blood?
Your body replaces the blood volume (plasma) within 24 hours. Red blood cells are replaced by the bone marrow into the circulatory system within about three to four weeks, while the lost iron is replaced over approximately six to eight weeks.

7. How will I feel after the donation?
Most people feel great! Donors who know what to expect and have eaten regular meals, or have had a snack and fluids before donating, are usually fine. Most people who donate blood have no after-effects. You should drink extra fluids for four hours following your donation. A small number of people feel light-headed and others occasionally faint after donating.
In the unlikely event that you feel faint, be sure to quickly lie completely flat. Lying flat, even if on the floor, with your legs elevated, will usually resolve any feelings of dizziness or light-headedness quite quickly and may prevent fainting.
In the event that you do not feel well after a blood donation, please contact the staff at your nearest blood donor centre.

8. Can I donate during my menstrual period?
Yes, if you are feeling well.

9. How soon after donating can I participate in sport?
After donation, it's best to have a snack and drink plenty of fluids over the next four hours. You can then resume routine sporting or training activity. It is advisable not to donate blood three to four weeks before participating in a major sporting event such as a marathon, or a competitive rugby or football match, where you intend to push yourself to the limit of your ability.

10. What is a “unit” of blood?
A unit is about 450 ml of donated blood. The average adult has between four and five litres of blood in his or her body, and can easily spare one unit.
Go to:

11. How often can I donate blood?
You may donate either whole blood or a specific blood component such as blood platelets. Each type of donation requires a certain waiting period before you can give again. After a whole blood donation, a person must wait at least 56 days before donating again.
The minimum interval between whole blood donations is 12 weeks for men and 16 weeks for women. Platelet and plasma donors are able to donate more frequently.

12. What tests are performed on my blood after donation?
A sample of your blood will be tested to determine your ABO blood group and RhD type. Other tests will be performed to detect certain transfusion-transmissible infections such as hepatitis B and C viruses, HIV and syphilis. Not every infection in a person's blood can be detected by these blood tests. It is therefore vitally important that people who may have been infected with a transfusion-transmissible infection do not, under any circumstances donate blood.
After the tests have been performed, your blood will be used either as whole blood (transfused to one patient) or, after separation into its various components such as the red blood cells, platelets and plasma components, to help several patients.
If you test the blood that is donated, why do you have such a lengthy donor selection process?
Our duty is to provide a safe blood supply and the BTS needs your help to maintain these standards. Although all blood donations are tested for viruses, including hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV and syphilis, there is a period of time after a person first becomes infected with a virus during which the infection may not be detectable (this is often referred to as the “window period”). So, the person's blood could still transmit a disease if transfused to a patient, even though their tests were negative and there was no sign of infection at the time of donation. Also, tests are not available for infections such as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD: mad cow disease). For this reason, a thorough donor selection process is essential.


13.Why do you ask such personal questions during the donor selection process?
A major component of our screening process is designed to identify those people who are at a greater risk of transmitting blood-borne infections. In order to safeguard the blood supply it is imperative that these people do not give blood. All donor selection measures must meet stringent regulatory requirements. While the process is lengthy and may seem intrusive, it is absolutely necessary to safeguard the blood supply.





	
